The man Gideon is the Bible example we will consider.
But what is the challenge this talk intends to address?
Are you ready for this?
Differences between fellow Christians.
You might think, no, how can that be?
Jesus said the identify mark of his disciples
would be the love among themselves, not the differences.
And that is true.
In our Christian Brotherhood, we feel the love.
Love is prominent, it is dominant.
But as individuals, we are drenched in imperfection.
Differences will inevitably erupt.
James 3, 2, doesn't mention any words.
It says, we all all stumble many times.
Not constantly, not every day.
But it acknowledges that we make mistakes many times.
A brother or sister may say something to hurt us.
Or maybe we push their emotional button with words,
or they push ours.
Usually it's not intentional.
Often it's a misunderstanding.
We or they say something in good faith.
One thinks that appropriate, the other does not.
Or possibly, what we said or did,
was perceived in a way that we could not even have imagined.
But it happened.
And now we must sow peace in order to reap peace.
And when we plant seeds, some germinate much faster than others.
In the opening talk of this symposium,
it acknowledges that a farmer trusts he will see results in due time.
If we find ourselves at odds with a fellow Christian,
the Bible example of Gideon can help us to sow and reap peace.
Now Gideon was at war with the Midianites.
And he asked his fellow worshippers, the Ephraimites,
to help chase them down.
Judges, chapter 8.
They had tremendous success.
We say, great.
But after the battle, the Ephraimites were offended.
They tried to pick a fight with Gideon.
They felt that Gideon did not call them into battle soon enough.
Judges 8.1.
Then the men of Ephraim said to him,
what have you done to us?
Why did you not call us when you went to fight against Midian?
And they quarreled bitterly with him?
Well, these are all armed fighting men.
If this difference of opinion was allowed to escalate,
it could go out of hand very quickly.
In fact, in this case, hand-to-hand combat might have ensued.
Instead, though, how did Gideon's so peace with words?
Let's read verses two and three.
Hey, Gideon said to them,
what have I done compared with you?
Are not the gleanings of Ephraim better than the great harvest
of Abysir?
It was into your hand that God gave Midian's princes Orab and Zeab.
And what have I done compared with you?
And notice, when he spoke this way, they calm down.
Now, in this case, the germination period was very short.
Gideon sowed peace with well-choes and words,
and he reaped peace in one conversation.
Now, in the following dramatization,
notice how a brother prevents a situation
from escalating into a confrontation.
And you know how Jehovah's people are.
When there's a need, our brothers step up.
So even though we had a lot of work to do back then,
we always had willing workers.
So many workers that some started to feel
like they were being overlooked.
Hey, Ray, what's up?
Hey, Mad, I hear you're organizing the food distribution
for our congregation.
Yeah, try my best.
Yeah, well, can I give you a hand?
My truck's all ready to go.
We actually finished just loading up for the day,
so I think we're good.
But wow, yeah, thank you very much for offering.
Okay, when's the next run?
You know what, Ray, we're about to pull out right now.
Is it okay if I call you back?
Yeah, yeah, sure.
Ray was such a hard worker.
More than most of us even realized.
He put his heart into every assignment.
But when I told him we already had all the help we needed,
it didn't go the way I helped.
Ray, I think you're muted.
So what you're saying is you don't think I'm qualified to help out?
No, no, we just...
We know how hard you're working caring for your mom.
Is Paul Thompson on your crew?
Yeah, but...
And Oliver Kagan.
Oliver's my assistant, yes.
So how does this work, man?
I mean, you just use your friends,
and you shut the rest of us out.
Don't you think I noticed how your brothers ignore me?
Ray, how are you an apology?
I'm so sorry.
I should have spoke with you about this right from the start.
You're working so hard taking care of your mom.
The last thing we wanted to do was make things harder for you.
But even more than that,
we didn't want to have to ask you to do something
that would put you or your mother at higher risk.
I know. I worry about that, too.
Your mom?
We wouldn't want anything to happen to her.
She's one of our congregation treasures.
I know.
And you're not so bad, either.
Seriously.
You're such a good example.
And think how Jehovah must feel
when he sees all that you're doing.
For us and for your mom.
Thank you.
That means a lot to me.
If something comes up that I can help with then,
even just a little, and I can do it from home.
Two good brothers.
But due to imperfection,
they were both looking at the exact same situation
with two different perspectives.
Matt was well intended
in what he did for Ray.
He realized he was caring for his early mother.
He was trying to protect him.
But Ray is offended.
He even accused Matt of showing favoritism to his friends
and ignoring others.
Well, how did this calm down?
Well, first of all, thankfully,
Ray went directly to Matt
and asked his feelings between the two of them alone.
Well, what did that allow for a follow?
Well, Matt now had the opportunity
to absorb and understand Ray's concerns.
What a blessing that was.
And so what followed after that?
Well, you remember when he grasped it,
Matt paused and apologized.
His words, like Gideon's,
well spoken, calmed Ray down.
It was a short germination period.
He sowed and reaped peace in one conversation.
Well, how can we imitate Gideon
when there's future differences with fellow worshippers?
Second Timothy 224.
And recall when the men of Ephraim confronted Gideon,
they were confrontational.
They were upset.
They were rattling their sabers.
But here, Paul,
in effect, summarizes for Christians, Gideon's demeanor.
Second Timothy 224.
For a slave of the Lord does not need to fight.
You see, with words or swords.
Instead, like Gideon, it says,
but needs to be gentle toward all, qualified to teach.
And notice this.
Showing restraint when wrong.
That is not easy to do,
but showing restraint when wrong is a means of sowing peace.
Now, if it's just a minor offense,
we might ask ourselves,
can I put up with this slight to avoid a confrontation?
But of course, in the case with Ray,
he felt hurt deeply.
Matt realized the perspective was different,
but you remember in hindsight,
Matt admitted I should have talked to you first.
With those words, he planted seeds of peace.
Now, amazingly long before the first century,
Gideon manifested later what became a Christian principle.
At Philippians 2.3, it says,
with humility, consider others superior to you.
Do you remember Gideon's exact expression?
Twice he said,
what have I done compared to you?
His humility calmed the ephromites down instantly.
So what can we do?
Well, we can apologize for our contribution to the difference,
even if the apology is done on the other person's terms.
We can pray for him.
We can give a sincere compliment.
It's something kind for the person.
And if we have a discussion,
may our words be gracious and toned kindly.
Now it would be nice of all the differences between Christians
could have a short germination cycle.
But due to circumstances,
personalities,
or the nature of the issue,
that's not always possible.
But may we each be determined to do our part
of the whole piece,
and like the farmer, expect peace in due time.
And oh,
how sweet restored peace truly is.
And now, Brother Robert Lucioni,
a helper for the Publishing Committee,
will give the next talk of this symposium entitled,
how they sowed and reap peace, Abigail.